# Some technical notes from Microchip
Many of the technical briefs from Microchip are... maybe not the most helpful documents. Some of them aren't totally worthless however, and these are some that look like the might be more useful than average.  Obviously, the official titles of these documents are different from the titles of the links in almost every case. These are but a few of many. [Dont bother with the app note section, find the product page, and scroll down](https://www.microchip.com/)

## CCL
Microchip has in the past demonstrated a complete lack of creativity in the use of the CCL. Thankfully, they've been waking up to the power of the CCL - though sadly there's no indicaion that the functionality might be expanded any time soon. I've got over a dozen features on my wish-list for the CCL ranging from specific inputs (no way to get TCA WO3-5? No TCB 3 or 4?), to a shift register that doesn't involve taking over an SPI, to a one or more CCL++ blocks on a chip that have a 16-bit truth table and a fourth input (that's about the largest that the truth table doesn't become awkwardly large for. )
* [Their version of CCL-driven WS2812B - Not quite how I plan to implement it (their implementation requires a specific system clock, but makes more efficient use of peripherals)](https://github.com/microchip-pic-avr-examples/avr128da48-cnano-ws2812-mplab-mcc), but is in a similar vein. Except they want to do it while keeping the SPI in master mode - while half of my interest is in the potential for
* [How to generate morse code... using almost every peripheral on a 48-pin DX](https://github.com/microchip-pic-avr-examples/avr128da48-cnano-sos-training-mcc)
* ["Biphase Decoder"](https://github.com/microchip-pic-avr-examples/avr128da48-cnano-biphase-mplab-mcc/tree/master/Biphase_Decoder)
* ["Manchester Encoder"](https://github.com/microchip-pic-avr-examples/avr128da48-cnano-manchester-mplab-mcc/tree/master/Manchester_Encoder)
* Notice that these don't talk about doing dumb things like I do in some of the examples, like inverting the feedback input just to see how fast it oscillates (and certainly not piping the result to the external clock input and clocking the chip from it!).

## TCD - there ain't so much here
Let's be fair, the TCD IS the most complicated peripheral on any 8-bit AVR that isn't called an xMega (over on those parts, a peripheral like the TCD would stand out for it's simplicity and ease of use... xMega didn't seem to take off like they hoped. It's not entirely clear whether that had anything to do with the steep learning curve of all those whackjob peripherals, which achieved little gain in capability for a great deal of complexityh, or if it was some other reason. There is no shortage of other objections to the design principles at work: they couldn't be run at 5v, they cost a damned fortune, and they were basically trying to move up the compute-power/memory ladder but met fierce resistance from numerous well ARMed natives). Anyway, the TCD is the most complex peripheral measured by length of documentation, and as someone who has worked with every peripheral on these parts in some capacity, I would opine that that quantization understates it's complexity: between the synchronization-related effects and the rogues gallery of strange features, this one is a real doozy. If you can figure out how to use it though, it is an incredibly powerful timer.  Their documentation group has attempted to make sense out of the TCD for people with this largely useless docucuemnt:
* ["Getting started with the TCD"](https://ww1.microchip.com/downloads/en/Appnotes/TB3212-Getting-Started-with-TCD-DS90003212.pdf) (an accurate name - it won't get you anywhere near the finish line)
* I'm not even sure what documentation I would want to see out of them. What bothers me isn't anything in specific, it's just that there seems to be no rhyme or reason to this timer... I think more than anything what the TCD needs is a rationalization of all it's features, how they come together and how they were envisioned to be used. Like those fault actions? What what the intended use case? Something that said "This is how you might make it control a DC-DC converter and here's how the fault inputs would be useful there, here's how you'd control a BLDC motor, and this type of feedback might be used with this sort of fault input scheme"

## OPAMPs for the DB-series
These are probably the most useful of the documents, because the OPAMPs are so novel, and many of us (us being the denizens of Ardino-land) aren't as familiar with analog stuff.
* [Opamp Calibration](https://ww1.microchip.com/downloads/en/Appnotes/GainOffsetCalib-AnalogSignalCond-OPAMP-Periph-DS00003633A.pdf)
* [Constant current driver with OPAMP](https://ww1.microchip.com/downloads/en/Appnotes/ConstCurr-Driver-AnalogSignalCond-OPAMP-Periph-DS00003632A.pdf)
* [That "use the DAC and OPAMP for MVIO" function marketing can't shut up about](https://ww1.microchip.com/downloads/en/Appnotes/Using-Int-OPAMP-Regulated-PowerSup-MVIO-DS00003636A.pdf)
* [Overcurrent protection and OPAMPS](https://ww1.microchip.com/downloads/en/Appnotes/AN3860-OverCurrProt-using-int-OPAMPs-on-AVRDB-DS00003860.pdf)
* [General OPAMP techniques](https://ww1.microchip.com/downloads/aemDocuments/documents/MCT08/ApplicationNotes/ApplicationNotes/Maximizing-the-Signal-Embedded-Operational-Amplifiers-90003110A.pdf)

## ADC tips and tricks
There are tips and tricks for running the ADC. They appear to have been written under strict orders not to provide any quantitative recommendations. The things I was most hoping for (things like "The latest parts have lika a million tunables - which ones should I pick if I want to best measure an analog signal of ____ impedance that changes at ___ Hz (or ___ V/s)? " amd "When I accumulte values on 2-series or Ex, how many of the low bits are signal, and how many are noise, and what can I do to maximize that ratio?", "Is the theoretical 17-bit accuracy from 1024x oversampling and decimation anything other than marketing hype?", "Can you make any quantitative recommendation whatsoever on selection of any of these 'tunable' options?") are not covered - *at all*. . It's a bit like reading a non-classified summary of some highly classified document.
* [General hints of dubious value](https://ww1.microchip.com/downloads/aemDocuments/documents/MCU08/ApplicationNotes/ApplicationNotes/Max-Signal-Properly-TipsTrick-Acq-Analog-Signals-DS00004225.pdf)
* [DSP on an 8-bit AVR](https://ww1.microchip.com/downloads/en/Appnotes/Digital-Signal-Proc-Perform-AVR8Core-DS00002701B.pdf)

### EA-series and 2-series only
These don't give very useful answers to the several "tunables" on the 2-series which may or may not be present on the EA-series (they seem to not be listed in the ATPACK headers, which is strange)
* [12-bit differental ADC (EA/2-series only in burst mode)](https://ww1.microchip.com/downloads/en/Appnotes/TB3254-How-to-Use-the-12-Bit-Differential-ADC-Burst-Accumulation-Mode-DS90003254A.pdf)
* [12-bit differental ADC (EA/2-series only in single mode with the PGA mode](https://ww1.microchip.com/downloads/en/Appnotes/TB3256-How-to-Use-the-12-Bit-Differential-ADC-with-PGA-in-Single-Mode-DS90003256A.pdf)
* [12-bit differental ADC (EA/2-series only in addumulation mode](https://ww1.microchip.com/downloads/en/Appnotes/TB3257-How-to-Use-the-12-Bit-Differential-ADC-in-Series-Accumulation-Mode-DS90003257A.pdf)
* [Example case of a force sensiive resistor and the 12-bit ADC](https://ww1.microchip.com/downloads/en/Appnotes/AN3408-How-to-Use-Force-Sensitive-Resistor-with-12-bit-ADC-DS00003408A.pdf)

## Other
* [A nice review of ways to use matrix keypads](https://ww1.microchip.com/downloads/en/Appnotes/00003407A.pdf)
* [Just because you can make your own buck converters doesn't mean you should - but here's some information for those who insist](https://ww1.microchip.com/downloads/en/Appnotes/Buck-ConvDesign-Feedback-Ctrl-Using-CIP-DS00003725A.pdf) Note that they use the type B timer here, not the type D one, which is supposed to be made to cater to such uses...

## When all else fails, read the documentation
When I refer to the actual documentation, I refer to three critical documents. Two of them are essential reading for anyone stepping an inch outside of the Arduino API, and is specific to the chip, and one far more general, esoteric, and enlightening (this is not the same as being useful for programming tasks)

* Be sure to read the datasheet. Then, read the relevant chapters a few more times. They don't just write those things for fun, and frankly thee datasheets aren't about to win any awards for good technical writing. They're not bad (which in and of itself is unfortunately unusual), but they're not great, amd it takes a few passes to truly grok the concepts that guided these designs (The designers took instructions from the managers, designed the product, and then told the technical writing team how it worked (and if they're anything like the engineers I know, they did a lousy job of explaining it). Product briefs on the other hand (like the clothing of the same name) cover only the most important elements: The pinout, feature list, and I/O Multiplexing and Considerations chart - which is, far and away, the part you will most often refer to while working with the modern AVRs.

* The headers are an incredible resource
The [core documentation gives a general description]
In fact, because of the great consistency between modern AVRs this has proven to leave very little to the imagination. In the case of the DD, by the time the datasheets were released, there were basically no surprises left - all the peripherals were known from the DB. The only new information in the datasheet was the fact that all the pins are fully async. In the case of the EA thus far, there are a few clear, straightforward changes in the event system, and a couple of new mappings for TCA1, and 1 new mapping for TCD0... and that's about it. We know the ADC pretty well from the 2-series. At least one of the annoying tunables that they won't tell us how to use correctly is gone, replaced with "sign chopping".

* [AVR Instruction Set Reference](https://ww1.microchip.com/downloads/en/DeviceDoc/AVR-InstructionSet-Manual-DS40002198.pdf)
If working with assembly you should make a rigorous study of the insruction set reference. One of the great strengths of AVR is the simplicity of the instruction set. You should know all the mneumonics, what arguments they take and what constraints apply - and this does not take a terribly great deal of effort, as there are not that many instructions. This is the Bible of the AVR architecture. Much like any other tome of the sort, it is packed with insight and wisdom from the creators, and describe in detail considerations you must observe, and some parts are not readily applicable to the present day`*`, and reading it is a long slog through obtuse verbiage and grammar. Unlike other more famous scriptures, you won't suffer eternal damnation for not reading this - but if you're writing assembly without it you may not be able to tell the difference. Even those who merely write C should try to make time for a cursory study of this, because this is what the compiler is turning your C into, and you can sometimes make choices that lead to the compiler being able to make better code.

### The datasheets giveth
* [tinyAVR 2-series](https://ww1.microchip.com/downloads/en/DeviceDoc/ATtiny1624-26-27-DataSheet-DS40002234B.pdf). Written for the 16k parts but applies to 32k ones as well.
* [tinyAVR 1+Series](http://ww1.microchip.com/downloads/en/DeviceDoc/ATtiny1614-16-17-DataSheet-DS40002204A.pdf) Written for 16k parts, but the 32k parts are the same

* [tinyAVR 1-Series](https://ww1.microchip.com/downloads/en/DeviceDoc/ATtiny417-817-DataSheet-DS40001901C.pdf) Written for 817/417, but applies equally to the smaller parts with fewer pins.

* [tinyAVR 1-series with 2 or 4k of flash](https://ww1.microchip.com/downloads/en/DeviceDoc/ATtiny212-214-412-414-416-DataSheet-DS40002287A.pdf)
* [tinyAVR 0-series](https://ww1.microchip.com/downloads/aemDocuments/documents/MCU08/ProductDocuments/DataSheets/ATtiny804-06-07-1604-06-07-DataSheet-DS40002312A.pdf) written for 8/16k parts, should apply to all.
* [tinyAVR402/202](http://ww1.microchip.com/downloads/en/DeviceDoc/ATtiny202-402-AVR-MCU-with-Core-Independent-Peripherals_and-picoPower-40001969A.pdf)

### And the errata taketh away
Notice that while datasheets generalize across a series for all flash sizes (on the Dx-series, I've gone as far as ripping pdf's to text and comparing it. No differences. No, I do not know why there are so many datasheets for parts with the same functionality differing only in flash), but the errata does NOT, because (particularly on the 1-series) between part releases in different flash sizes, bugs are fixed and occasionally introduced. Errata do generalize over a flash size for all pincounts though (except for the 417 which shares errata with 8k 1-series parts).
* Not very much on the 2-series
  * [tinyAVR 2-series 32k parts](https://ww1.microchip.com/downloads/aemDocuments/documents/MCU08/ProductDocuments/Errata/ATtiny3224-3226-3227-SilConErrataClarif-DS40002342A.pdf)
  * [tinyAVR 2-series 16k parts](https://ww1.microchip.com/downloads/aemDocuments/documents/MCU08/ProductDocuments/Errata/ATtiny1624-26-27-SilConErrataClarif-DS80000902D.pdf)
  * [tinyAVR 2-series 4/8k parts](https://ww1.microchip.com/downloads/aemDocuments/documents/MCU08/ProductDocuments/Errata/ATtiny424-426-427-824-826-827-SilConErrataClarif-DS80000955B.pdf)
* Lots more taketh away on the 1-series
  * [tinyAVR 1+series 32k parts - does NOT apply to smaller parts](https://ww1.microchip.com/downloads/aemDocuments/documents/MCU08/ProductDocuments/Errata/ATtiny3216-17-SilConErrataClarif-DS80000887B.pdf)
  * [tinyAVR 1+series 16k parts](https://ww1.microchip.com/downloads/aemDocuments/documents/MCU08/ProductDocuments/Errata/ATtiny1614-16-17-SilConErrataClarif-DS80000886C.pdf) - yeah, the 32k ones are at Rev. C of the die, and had no Rev B, and most of the bugs are fixed, but down on 16k, we did get a Rev. B which fixed almost nothing.
  * [tinyAVR 1-series 8k parts + 417](https://ww1.microchip.com/downloads/aemDocuments/documents/MCU08/ProductDocuments/Errata/ATtiny417-814-816-817-SilConErrataClarif-DS80000934A.pdf) - Based on the early revision of this document, I am skeptical of it's completeness
  * [tinyAVR 1-series 2-4k parts](https://ww1.microchip.com/downloads/aemDocuments/documents/MCU08/ProductDocuments/Errata/ATtiny212-214-412-414-416-SilConErrataClarif-DS80000933.pdf) - Based on the early revision of this document, I am skeptical of it's completeness
* Less than the 1-series, but that's unsurprising since these cut so many features (and for so little cost savings), so there's just less for there to be errata in.
  * [tinyAVR 0-series 8-16k parts](https://ww1.microchip.com/downloads/aemDocuments/documents/MCU08/ProductDocuments/Errata/ATtiny804-06-07-1604-06-07-SilConErrataClarif-DS80000951A.pdf) - Based on the early revision of this document, I am skeptical of it's completeness
  * [tinyAVR 0-series 2-4k parts](https://ww1.microchip.com/downloads/aemDocuments/documents/MCU08/ProductDocuments/Errata/ATtiny202-204-402-404-406-SilConErrataClarif-DS80000956A.pdf)

#### What can be inferred from the groupings of errata?
It is almost certain that Microchip is using the same die for several parts, and that different parts with the same flash size just have different numbers of pads connected, and have been told what they are during factory calibration.

This is supported by the presence on the secondary market of a mysterious batch of ATtiny412's which thought that they were 416's. I never got an answer about what the deal with those is - but my theory is that microchip screwed up and programmed a bunch of 412's to be 416's. They detected the error, and disposed of the impacted parts. Unfortunately some crook got their hands on Microchip's trash, and was shocked to find piles of apparently brand new tiny412's, and started selling them to the dodgier resellers of Aliexpress et. al. The only plausible alternative I can come up with is a bungled counterfeit, but I think that is unlikely. If that were the case, we would see lots of (counterfeit) modern tinyAVR parts on aliexpress, but all we see is dodgy 412's.

If we accept that theory of the bogus 412's being microchip's screwup that they detected and attempted to discard, but escaped on it's way to the landfill, that tells us something we likely all suspected but weren't certain of: Microchip's factory cal process, wherein they among other things tell the part what it is, cannot be performed on an encapsulated, calibrated chip - either because of the encapsulated part (ie, there is a pad on the die not connected to a pin used for this), or because it had already gotten a cal-and-identity, and the process is irreversible. I consider the latter to be far more likely. If cal could be run on a chip once it was packaged, and was not one-time-only, they'd have been able to simply pass the chips back into the cal process to give them a new identity, and wouldn't have thrown them away.

If the cal-and-identity process does not require access to the bare die (again, I think this is likely, as the chips come with UPDI already which by the nature of it's protocol, with the KEYs, is virtually certain to have Microchip-secret modes (you're telling me they designed a lock, but then told everyone ALL the keys for it? (well, they don't tell you the debug KEYs, but they would be trivial to extract with another AVR and it's USART in autobaud mode and the RX line connected to the UPDI line of the chip while instructing it to enable the OCD with MPLAB/Studio/Etc) I don't buy it. They've got at least one secret KEY, probably several. One for cal obviously, not sure what else. And maybe one that lets them use self-test features. We know that at least during development, the 2-series had a BIST "peripheral" that would test the memory (RAM I think?) with various challenge patterns `*` - I don't know if it is actually there on the production devices (I suspect it is, though possibly locked behind a KEY-protected interface like how nvmctrl lets updi execute an extra command, and write to the boot section and fuses), but with what little can be gathered from the headers, it's plausible that it's a mechanism used for production testing, not just something used in development to assess the soundness of their SRAM design) - and it would likely be the easiest way to implement the cal process with minimum silicon. All they'd need to to do lock the door behind them is to make the chips refuse to write if sigrow wasn't empty, and provide no way to erase it.

Another interesting thing is the fact that the 417 shares a die not with the other 4k parts, but with the 8k ones. Sounds to me like... the 2/4k die only supported 18 I/O pins? I wonder if the 24-pin version was always planned or added later in the design process (it's clear that they were in that kind of design process - look at what they did on 16k+ parts? bam, double the ram and a bunch more peripherals. Because they had decided the next parts coming out were going to have these features, you engineers said they were simple to add, go do it on the rest of the 1-series); I've always wondered why it came in QFN but not TSSOP or something. They hardly ever have parts available in only one package, and when they do there's a reason.

`*` If you don't think that's a reasonable selftest measure, you don't understand the difficulty of memory testing. The key complication is that you can't assume all issues will be local. A former employee at a major semiconductor test equipment manufacturer related tales of the difficulty of making a memory self-test; he described tests such as "walking 1's" and "walking 0's" - a single 1 or 0 bit in memory, and then shift it through that byte, after each shift checking the entire memory for any sign of the walking bit corrupting other bits (and of course run time was an issue then...) - then do the same thing in the next byte, and so on, on top of using "challenge" patterns that are known to be more likely than average patterns to cause problems. Hence, a BIST that acts like a peripheral with a block of registers is not surprising - I suspect all parts have it, and the tiny2 was just the one where they missed it while cleaning the headers for public release.
