# Optiboot for megaTinyCore
Optiboot existed long before these parts had even been conceived of, as an answer to the bloated bootloader used on the early Arduino boards. A key improvement was that Optiboot cut the STK500 protocol down to the bare minimum needed for communication with avrdude (It might be described as "read and write flash on command, otherwise, smile and nod" Any command that we don't know how to answer, we just respond with an acknowledgement and hope or fake numbers and hope it's okay with that). It was subsequently ported to every classic AVR imaginable. And then to the modern AVRs (they are very different in how they write - but the STK protocol didn't change, and implementing that is more work.)

## Bootloader support
This can be installed using a UPDI programmer by selecting the desired part, and using the Tools -> Burn Bootloader option. Afterwards, uploading can be performed via serial using the appropriate pins. If you are using a crystal, (hopefully obviously) you can't use USART0's default pin mapping. Note that even with an external crystal, the bootloader still runs from the internal oscillator, so you will always be able to reprogram.
The bootloader will be lost if new code is updated via UPDI programming.

Once the part is bootloaded, sketches can be uploaded by connecting a serial adapter to those pins.

Unfortunately, DTR autoreset is a problem: it requires a reset pin. The pin is shared with UPDI, and if set to act as a reset pin, it can't be used to program over UPDI; you need to use an HV UPDI programmer (which is somewhat exotic) to turn the pin back into a UPDI pin temporarily, allowing you to program it to have the normal functionality on that pin. The 2-series parts with 20 or 24 pins have the option to configure PB4 to act as the reset pin instead. In that case, the normal DTR reset configuration can be used without complication, and this is a much more viable option.

If you are using a part without alt-reset, and you don't have an HV programmer, the only way you can use it with the bootloader (without rendering it unprogrammable except through the bootloader or with an HV programmer) is by choosing the option that runs on startup, and then unplugging and plugging it back in, or by using "Ersatz-reset" (see the example included by that name) - otherwise known as setting a low level pin interrupt that triggers a software reset. This is not bulletproof. It is almost certainly possible to hose the system badly enough to keep this from working, and you can also upload a sketch doesn't But it may be better than having to plug and unplug it all the time.

## Bootloader considerations
Should you use a bootloader?
1. If the board is for production and you don't intend for users to be updating the code, no. Use UPDI programming
2. For development, if you don't have an HV programmer, unless you're working with tinyAVR 2-series with 20 or 24 pins, it is not recommended for the reasons described above. If you are, it is personal preference.
3. If you need to store data in flash from the app - you don't have a choice; you must use optiboot (see below).

Assuming you *are* working with a board that supports autoreset...
1. Using a single port and bootloader is an "easier" setup for people to get working - it's only dependency is avrdude, versus SerialUPDI which needs to pull in a whole python package or jtag2updi which needs another processor. So this is a good choice for a product that end users will update in the field. It's also much more like classic AVR devices with which everyone is familiar.
2. There are many ways to get normal serial to work over longer distances (as in longer wires). These do not apply to SerialUPDI, so if it's at the end of long wires, you might do better with Optiboot.
3. If the board is designed with the expectation that it will be used Optiboot (it has autoreset, and the documentation recommends using optiboot, you'll likely be happoer using that.

## Upload speed
It's actually not bad - it beats jtag2updi, easily (since that needs to send each page to the programmer, and then the programmer has to send that to the target), and is highly competitive with serialUPDI, more so than the Dx-series is. The more complicated write process means more USB latency delays on SerialUPDI than on the Dx-series, which works in Optiboot's favor. However, SerialUPDI is able to win by sheer brute force - Optiboot runs at 115200 baud, but SerialUPDI can be run as fast as 460800 baud!

I've been asked about supporting the no-verify option. I have decided against providing that option - there is absolutely no error checking whatsoever at any point in the upload process other than verify.

## Sketch clock speed
**IMPORTANT**
When you "burn bootloader", the base oscillator frequency is set according to the selected clock speed. The actual operating speed while running the sketch is when the sketch is compiled. You can bootload with a 16-MHz derived speed, change the menu to 20, and then upload something, and it will run at the wrong speed, and you will see nothing but gibberish on the serial monitor. If you initially set it to 16/8/4/1MHz, you may use any of those options when you upload your sketch and it will run at that speed; if you initially set it to 20/10/5MHz, you may use any of those options. If you wish to change between 16/8/4/1MHz and 20/10/5MHz, you must burn bootloader again - failure to do so will result in it running at the wrong speed, and all timing will be wrong. When uploading via UPDI, we set the OSCCFG fuse every time. That's not possible when uploading through the bootloader though. And since the bootloader runs at the same baud rate, you aren't notified by an upload failure (like would usually happen on classic AVRs.)

There is a "workaround" for this sketch dependence on the fuse value, though. The tinyAVR parts have an extremely flexible oscillator. For the 1-series, the "16 MHz" one can be tuned to speeds between (typically) 10 MHz and over 25, while the "20 MHz" one can often hit 32, though none of the ones I've tried it on were stable at 32. The 2-series parts can go from approx. 12 up to around 30 on the "16 MHz" oscillator, and something like 15 through the mid 30's on the 2-series (they're often stable as high as 32, unlike 1-series, too). Since 16 and 20 are in both of those ranges, if you "tune" the internal oscillator, and then select a "tuned" speed when uploading, you can upload through optiboot and get 16 or 20 MHz as desired, regardless of what speed you selected when bootloading it. See the [tuning guide](https://github.com/SpenceKonde/megaTinyCore/blob/master/megaavr/extras/Ref_Tuning.md).

## Upload using Programmer is not supported
Optiboot boards will not work if a sketch is uploaded via UPDI. Only two schemes are supported by this core for getting a compiled binary onto the chip:
* Use UPDI to upload the sketch (this is the non-optiboot configuration). You must have a board definition without (Optiboot) in the name selected.
* Use UPDI to burn the bootloader, and thereafter upload sketches through Optiboot. You must have a board definition with (Optiboot) in the name selected.
* Use of UPDI to upload a sketch compiled for an optiboot board definition is NOT supported.

This difference is due to the fact that unlike classic AVRs, the size of the bootloader must be known at compile time. The BOOTEND fuse determines the start of the app section (the bootloader comes before the app), and the compiler is told to generate binaries that start 512 bytes after the beginning of the flash to leave room for the bootloader. Since the interrupt vector default location ALSO depends on BOOTEND (so the vectors are at the start of the app section), this imposes a two-way barrier. A sketch compiled for use with a bootloader will start at 0x200, and it's vectors will start there, while one compiled for non-bootloader use will have it's vectors start from 0x00; a chip set up for the bootloader will jump to locations starting with 0x200 upon interrupts, while a chip with no bootloader (which technically means the whole flash is treated as bootloader) will have it's vectors start from 0x00. Since a chip erase is performed as part of a UPDI upload, just like on a classic AVR, uploading using programmer from an optiboot definition would trash the bootloader too (in addition to jumping off into deep space the first time an interrupt fires)

We *do* permit uploading sketches via UPDI with a non-optiboot board definition, irrespective of whether the target board was previously bootloaded - this is because when uploading via UPDI, we can write fuses, and hence can freely write 0 to the BOOTEND fuse. So we simply perform a chip erase and write 0x00 to the BOOTEND fuse in this case, "unbootloading" the part cleanly. But to make the same happen in reverse, we would need to concatenate the bootloader with the sketch binary, which we currently do not have a graceful way to do. Since this would also effectively bootload the board, it would also raise questions about what fuses should be set (see main readme).

I am hoping to find a way to output an error more gracefully, but in 2.5.0, the solution results in the top of the error being something like this
In white text:
```text
ERROR: Upload using programmer is not supported on optiboot boards""C:\arduino-1.8.13\hardware\tools\avr/bin/avrdude -CC:\Users\Spence\Documents\Arduino\hardware\megaTinyCore\megaavr/avrdude.conf -v -pattiny3216 -cjtag2updi -PCOM11 -Ufuse2:w:0x02:m -Ufuse6:w:0x04:m -Ufuse8:w:0x02:m -Uflash:w:C:\Users\Spence\AppData\Local\Temp\arduino_build_10043/sketch_dec10a.ino.hex:i
```
In orange "error text":

```text
java.io.IOException: Cannot run program "ERROR: Upload using programmer is not supported on optiboot boards\"\"C:\arduino-1.8.13\hardware\tools\avr/bin/avrdude": CreateProcess error=2, The system cannot find the file specified
```
I hope this is clear enough.

## Sketch size avrdude reports is wrong
The "size" of the sketch as reported by avrdude during the upload process is 512b larger (the size of the bootloader) than the actual sketch size when a bootloader is in use (though the size reported at the end of the compile process is the correct size). The fact that the bootloader goes at the start of the flash instead of the end confuses avrdude. The size displayed by the IDE when you "verify" a sketch is correct, the value that avrdude displays is not.

## Entry Conditions
Depending on your needs, you may want or need different configurations for when the bootloader should run and when it should just jump straight to the application. It determines this with the reset flags, which it clears, and then stashes in GPIOR0 right before jumping to app (preserving them in place prevents detection of error conditions resulting from dirty resets, which can turn what would have been an unwanted reset into a straight-up hang, or an unclean reset into a broken state). We now supply 6 versions of the bootloader (except for Microchip official boards that are not based on tinyAVR 2-series parts: On those we supply only ones that do not rely on external resets, since only one pin, the UPDI pin, can be made into reset, but the microchip boards don't have 12v capable or tolerant debuggers on them (and if you're cutting the strapping pins, you should no longer be selecting the Microchip board definition!)

| Version  | Timeout | UPDI reset (UPDIRF) | Software Reset (SWRF) | WDT reset (WDRF) | External (EXTRF) | Brownout (BORF) | Power On Reset (PORF)| None        | Microchip Boards |
|----------|---------|---------------------|-----------------------|------------------|------------------|-----------------|----------------------|-------------|------------------|
| _extr    |      1s |                Boot |                  Boot |       Always App |             Boot |         Ignored |                  App | Trigger SWR |       C1627 only |
| _extr8sec|      8s |                Boot |                  Boot |       Always App |             Boot |         Ignored |                  App | Trigger SWR |       C1627 only |
| _extronly|      1s |                Boot |                   App |       Always App |             Boot |         Ignored |                  App | Trigger SWR |       C1627 only |
| _swronly |      8s |                Boot |                   App |       Always App |              App |         Ignored |                  App | Trigger SWR |              Yes |
| _poronly |      8s |                Boot |                   App |       Always App |              App |         Ignored |                 Boot | Trigger SWR |              Yes |
| _porswr  |      8s |                Boot |                  Boot |       Always App |              App |         Ignored |                 Boot | Trigger SWR |              Yes |
| _all     |      8s |                Boot |                  Boot |       Always App |             Boot |         Ignored |                 Boot | Trigger SWR |              Yes |

In words, if the reset was caused by the WDT, we always clear reset flags, stash in GPIOR0, and jump to app, no matter what other flags may be present, because (since we always clear it and jump to app if WDRF is set), this is the most recent reset, and any other reset flag is likely what resulted in optiboot running and either timing out or uploading a sketch before triggering WDT timeout, so the bootloader has already run (or the app has triggered a WDT timeout - that's it's problem, so handing control to the app still seems correct). If any of the flags marked "Boot" are set, the bootloader will run. Otherwise the app will run. If no reset flags at all were set we have detected a dirty reset, and must force a software reset to get the hardware into a known configuration before we do anything, otherwise we are virtually guaranteed to fail.. This in turn will (in 4/7 of the bootloaders) potentially trigger the bootloader to run. But it will run after the clean reset, so it could actually function. Note that extr entry conditions are much less useful (and extronly entirely useless) unless you have a reset pin. The alternate reset pin on the 2-series parts is a real boon, and makes the bootloader a lot more comfortable on these parts, since the autoreset circuit works and you can thus make them act much like a Pro Mini that has a few less pins, but enough peripheral firepower to blow the doors off of the 328p.

In all cases, a UPDI reset is an entry condition, so we can see the lights flash right after we bootload as a sanity check (the only operationaly common UPDI reset). The value of BORF is ignored except in that it counts as "a reset flag", as it indicates a reset has taken place and there's no need to reset the chip defensively.

Finally, if exeecution ever arrives without any reset cause, we will fire a software reset, at which point it will meet the SWRF entry condition and wait the specified time for an upload. We do an additional reset here because this is generally an error condition - either your code jumped off into empty flash amd wrapped around, or you triggered and interrupt with no ISR. A lot of C's "undefined behavior" will result in this sort of "dirty" reset, where it starts executing from 0x0000 - *but hasn't actually been reset* and all the peripherals are set up however your application set them up before it crashed. Both the bootloader and the core assume that peripherals are in their power on state when the code starts running.

You can view the reset flags from the most recent run of the bootloader in the GPIOR0 register. If WDRF is set and nothing else is, your application experienced a WDT timeout, most likely. If SWRF is set after a reset that you did not expect to occur, and your code does not use SWR, it was a dirty reset. You smashed the stack, triggered an undefined interrupt, or ijmp'ed to a bogus pointer, or otherwise offended the chip, execution made it's way (potentialy after careening around like an out of control wreaking ball, potentially filling arbitrary registers and memory locations with arbitrary, bogus, data) to the reset vector without having ever reset, at which point we realized it was out of control and triggered a software reset to ensure a clean startup..

## Bootloader size
There is a critical difference between the classic AVRs and the modern ones, and this one I think is one of the few places they may have made a poor decision. On classic AVRs, the bootloader section was at the very end of the flash. When it was enabled, the chip would jump to there on reset instead of starting at 0x0000, the bootloader would do it's thing, and then get to the application code by jumping to 0x0000. That way, there was no need to know whether it was a bootloader or non-bootloader configuration at compile time. Now, the bootloader is at the start of the flash, and jumps to the end of it's section. Hence, the compiler needs to know to offset everything by 512 bytes (or more for other theoretical bootloaders), and now you cannot use optiboot to upload a binary compiled for non-optiboot mode, nor the other way around. You cannot translate a hex file compiled for optiboot to non-optiboot or vise-versa.

## Writing to the flash from the app
This can be done on parts with Optiboot (and not without it), using the [Flash Library](https://github.com/SpenceKonde/megaTinyCore/blob/master/megaavr/libraries/Optiboot_flasher) by @MCUDude.

This library achieves app-controlled writes to the flash by 'call'ing an entry point built into the bootloader which does the critical actions needed to write to the NVM (this is otherwise blocked - the flash is divided into three sections, Bootloader, Application, and Data; if no boot section is defined, the entire flash is treated as "Boot" and cannot be written except through an external programmer over UPDI).

A library could be written which would write to the data section, but that would require you specify the size of the data section when uploading (it could not be done automatically by the IDE). And if you got part of the sketch in the data section because you miscalculated, that section of code would.... "almost" work normally. It definitely isn't permitted to write to EEPROM or USERROW. I'm not sure if it is blocked from anything else. It is possible that the result would be that some portions of the sketch could write EEPROM and others couldn't. That, of course, is in addition to the minor detail of support for a mode like that never having been written for these parts. If someone wants it and modifies the library appropriately, I'll add the tools submenu for it, and if you need the DxCore-like write "almost anywhere" mode that uses a fake bootloader, I'll write the asm entry point and routines to access it if you'll handle the rest.

The <Flash.h> library used by DxCore is completely and totally different from this one, despite the same name and similar function. (among other things, it's *much* easier to do on a Dx, because only the actual instruction that writes to the flash needs to be run from the boot section, whereas for tinyAVR, both writes to NVMCTRL and the page buffer do),

### Differences in binaries (technical)
When the bootloader is enabled the interrupt vectors are located at the start of the application section, 512 bytes in (like megaAVR 0-series and tinyAVR 0/1-series, and unlike classic AVRs, the bootloader section is at the beginning of the flash). Options to set the desired USART that the bootloader will run on are available for all serial ports, with either the normal or alternate pin locations. USART0 with default pins is the default option here, and these are the ones that are connected to the 6-pin serial header on the DA-series breakout boards that I sell. An option is provided when burning bootloader to choose an 8 second delay after reset - use this if you will be manually pressing reset.

One's first thought on hearing about the binaries being different might be whether they really are different enough that you have to recompile - couldn't you just say, offset the non-bootloader one 512b, maybe with a simple python script? Unfortunately lots of instructions use absolute addresses. Catching jumps and calls is easy-peasy. You also need to handle LDS instructions targeting the mapped flash likewise need adjustment *but so does every indirect load (ld, ldd targeting mapped flash, plus all lpm)* and working backwards to find what values the pointer register would hold and where you could change a constant to get an offset of 0x200 from that without increasing the size of the sketch. THAT is non-trivial. So is handling ijmp's. Export compiled binary does generate files with different names for optiboot and non-optiboot, so it's easy to export both versions (and you can look at them and see just how different they are)

There are also a couple of small differences between what is generated for bootloader and non-bootloader boards. With a bootloader, we don't need to put in a guard function for handling of empty reset cause (see the [reset guide](https://github.com/SpenceKonde/megaTinyCore/blob/master/megaavr/extras/Ref_Reset.md), since Optiboot handles that. There may be additional differences in DxCore, depending on the configuration

## Future for Optiboot_x: Brighter than tinyAVR
I'm convinced that the tinyAVR brand is done for. The recently announced AVR-EB series adds a legion of troops to support the tanks and artillery surrounding the tinyAVR territory brought by the AVR DD and AVR EA-series. By all accounts, the tinyAVRs are heavily outmatched, and the most likely result is an unceremonious end to the ATtiny brand, just as ATmega was brought to the gallows almost as soon as the 0-series was released. And then there's the fact that they can't have a systematically named 3-series because they already have an ATTiny1634 (a classic AVR - but the numbering would place it at the heart of any 3-series.) AVR will be unified under banners of two capital letters - DA, DB, DD, EA, EB, and so on, with more consistent behavior and featuresets. Where does this leave Optiboot_x? In a better place than you'd think: Some or all of the new Ex-series appear to have an extremely similar NVM controller, such that adapting Optiboot_x to the EA-series may even be easy, and so DxCore (which will support both Dx and Ex-series parts) will likely end up including both optiboot_x and optiboot_dx, and I suspect the same version of optiboot_x with some added #ifdef's could serve both tinyAVR and Ex-series). It certainly looks like less work optiboot_dx, by a longshot.
